'''Adjectives''' in [[Aelaki]] originate from [[Stative_verbs|stative verb]] stems. They retain much of the verbal morphological system, including evidentiality marking, while also obeying noun-like agreement rules. This dual nature — verbal morphology with nominal agreement — makes adjectives one of the most morphologically complex parts of speech.

== Root structure ==

Like all Aelaki content words, adjectives are built from triconsonantal roots. The citation form uses the same C₁-V-C₂-V-C₃ template as nouns. The base vowels are determined by the adjective's own inherent pattern, which then shifts to agree with the modified noun.

== Degree ==

Adjectives undergo the same templatic morphological processes as other parts of speech in Aelaki:

{| class="wikitable"
! Degree !! Formation !! Example (k-r-n "bright")
|-
| [[Positive]] || Base form || ''koran''
|-
| [[Comparative]] || Reduplication of C₂ || ''kororan'' ("brighter")
|-
| [[Superlative]] || Umlaut (vowel fronting) || ''kœrœn'' ("brightest")
|-
| [[Negative]] || /f/ infix || ''korfan'' ("not bright")
|}

== Agreement ==

Adjectives must agree with their head [[Noun|noun]] in both '''gender''' and '''number'''. This agreement is obligatory and applies in all syntactic positions. The adjective's vowel pattern shifts to match the gender vowel of the noun it modifies:

{| class="wikitable"
! Gender !! Vowel !! Example
|-
| [[Child]] || u || ''kurun'' (bright, child)
|-
| [[Female]] || o || ''koran'' (bright, female)
|-
| [[Male]] || a || ''karan'' (bright, male)
|-
| [[Inanimate]] || ïf || ''kïfran'' (bright, inanimate)
|}

Number agreement follows the same pattern as nouns: reduplication for [[Plural|plural]], vowel fronting for [[Collective|collective]].

== Evidentiality ==

Unlike adjectives in many natural languages, Aelaki adjectives retain a full eight-way TAM (tense-aspect-mood) / evidentiality system inherited from their stative verb origins:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Suffix !! Evidentiality !! Notes
|-
| ''-shë'' || [[Visual]] || Speaker saw it directly
|-
| ''-ro'' || [[Auditory]] / testimony || Speaker heard it from someone
|-
| ''-mu'' || [[Inferential]] || Speaker deduced it
|-
| ''-ya'' || [[Optative]] || Speaker hopes/wishes it
|-
| ''go-'' + ''-shë'' || Hodiernal visual || Seen today
|-
| ''go-'' + ''-ro'' || Hodiernal testimony || Heard today
|-
| ''go-'' + ''-mu'' || Hodiernal inferred || Inferred today
|-
| ''go-'' + ''-ya'' || Hodiernal hopeful || Hoped today
|}

'''Note:''' The prefix ''goki-'' is '''never''' used with adjectives.

== Relationship to stative verbs ==

Adjectives and [[Stative_verbs|stative verbs]] share the same morphological system. The key differences:

{| class="wikitable"
! Feature !! Stative verb !! Adjective
|-
| Agreement || Suffix Ki (patient) || Gender/number agreement with head noun
|-
| Prefix aspects || Full set (inchoative, cessative, etc.) || Not used
|-
| Syntactic role || Predicate || Modifier or predicate
|-
| Evidentiality || Full TAM system || Full TAM system
|}

== See also ==

* [[Stative_verbs]] — the verbal source of adjective morphology
* [[Noun]] — nouns that adjectives agree with
* [[Comparative]] — comparative degree formation
* [[Superlative]] — superlative degree formation
* [[Adverb]] — adverbs derived from similar stems

[[Category:parts of speech]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]