

==Architecture==
Temples of the Kxakxa religion which I've not named yet, have torii-like gates ([[Ngorwiv]]) based on the rings. They have sundials on them and often clocks. The things were seen as the land of the gods. All rivers were believed to flow down from the rings.
==Creation myth==
A verse rendering of the same myth appears at [[Ringworld Gaiad]].

In a realm where celestial waters encircle the sky,

A cascade from heaven's ring, an endless supply.

This ring, a suspended ocean, vast and high,

Nourishes earth's rivers, never to run dry.

In their ethereal palace, gods observed with care,

Earth's verdant cloak, creatures dwelling there.

Their eyes found Maomaos, monkeys in their lair,

Spirited yet alone, in solitude's quiet snare.

Aelaneuk, first woman from the skies descended, 

"Heavy Sky," her name, with celestial grace blended.

To earth, she brought union, a bond extended,

Marrying Ngukud-p'u, monkey king, fates entwined.

Her dowry, twelve Maomaos, red-furred and kind, 

A gift to the king, in them a destiny designed.

But all female, the king observed with a mind keen;

With a broken leg set, one transformed, a male unseen.

Eleven more monkeys joined the royal harem, 

Each bore a daughter, a lineage to affirm.

When aged Ngukud-p'u, his life's light grew dim,

Left the harem to Aelaneuk, a role to him.

Transformed to a man, Aelaneuk's path anew,

Another from the ring descended, with Maomaos in view.

Wivrekxïb, "Ring Rain River," from the heavens she flew,

Joining the harem, her path to pursue.

Aelaneuk, now patriarch, fathered twelve, 

One daughter from each wife, his legacy delved.

Yet only his first, the monkey king's blood,

Would carry his name, a lineage flood.

When Aelaneuk passed, the eldest took the throne, 

Belmakel, her name, patriarch's role her own.

Thus flowed the lineage, from celestial dome,

A tapestry woven, from heaven's loom, earth roamed.




Aelaneuk's matrilineal descendant later becomes the first Empress

==Abolition of Child sacrifice==
It's complicated based on the biology of the species but essentially primogeniture equals matriarchy
[11:55 PM]
Alllaya Kuja was the youngest of the twelve wives of the king
[11:58 PM]
When she was pregnant she killed all of the wives older than her, plus her husband. Then she gave birth to her firstborn child of ambiguous paternity, and then she got pregnant again from the old rich guy who was not the king that she was dating.

==Deities==
* The great rings (p'awiv)
* Aelaneuk the first woman (Ninigi) Aela (sky) neuk (fall)
* Ngukud-p'u (Sarutahiko equivalent) 
**# nguk (monkey), ud (farm), p'u (lord)
**# [3:05 AM]  Monkey farmer lord
**# [3:05 AM]  basically a direct translation of Sarutahiko
**# [3:05 AM]  Saru (monkey), ta (farm), hiko (prince)
* Belmakel (third patriarch)
* Wivrekxïb (nigihayahi)
* Alllaya Kuja (Empress, matrilineal descendant of Aelaneuk)

==Religious cycle==
The lineages above are organised into a 60-year system of age-and-gender classes: see [[The divine 60]].

[[Category:Ringworld]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]