The '''cessative''' aspect in Aelaki expresses the cessation or stopping of an action or state. It is one of the [[Stative aspects|stative verb aspects]], formed with the prefix '''nï-''' combined with '''umlaut''' of the verb stem.

== Formation ==

The cessative requires two modifications:
# The prefix '''nï-''' is added to the verb
# The stem undergoes '''umlaut''' (vowel fronting)

{| class="wikitable"
! Stative verb !! Cessative !! Meaning
|-
| zoduk (know) || nïzedik || forget (stop knowing)
|-
| apafath (fall) || nï'æpæfath || stop falling
|}

Note that the stem ''zoduk'' becomes ''zedik'' through umlaut, and ''apafath'' becomes ''æpæfath''.

== Continuative form ==

The continuative of the cessative is formed by reduplicating the prefix:

{| class="wikitable"
! Base !! Continuative !! Meaning
|-
| nïzedik || nïnïzedik || forgetting (in the process of stopping knowing)
|}

== Semantic scope ==

The cessative indicates the end or termination of a state. With ''zoduk'' "know", the cessative ''nïzedik'' means "forget" — that is, to stop knowing something.

== Why the umlaut stem? ==

The cessative uses the same umlaut (vowel fronting) as the [[Telic|telic perfect]] and [[Gnomic|gnomic]] aspects. This is not a coincidence: cessation is fundamentally a '''completion'''. When a state ceases, that state has reached its endpoint — the same semantic territory as the telic perfect (action completed with goal met). The umlaut operation consistently marks completion across Aelaki grammar, whether that completion is of an action (telic perfect), a universal truth (gnomic), or the ending of a state (cessative).

== Relationship to other stative aspects ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Prefix !! Aspect !! Example !! Meaning
|-
| ho- || [[Probable]] || hozoduk || curious (about to know)
|-
| nü- || [[Inchoative]] || nüzoduk || learn (start to know)
|-
| '''nï-''' (+ umlaut) || '''Cessative''' || '''nïzedik''' || '''forget (stop knowing)'''
|-
| lu- || [[Resumptive]] || luzedik || remember (resume knowing)
|-
| ko- || [[Almost]] || kozoduk || almost learn
|}

== See also ==

* [[Cess]] (redirect)
* [[Inchoative]]
* [[Resumptive]]
* [[Repetitive]]

[[Category:grammatical aspects]]
[[Category:Stative aspects]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]