'''Converbs''' are non-finite verb forms in [[Aelaki]] that function as adverbial subordinate clauses. They are divided into two classes based on how they interact with [[TAM]] (tense-aspect-mood) marking.

== Class I: Prefix converbs ==

Class I converbs are formed with a '''prefix''' and retain full TAM inflection. The general syntax is:

<code>[PREFIX- [DAY-] (SUBJ-[[Ki_syllables|Ki]]) (INST-Ki) ROOT.ASPECT-(OBJ-Ki)-TAM]</code>

Because they keep the full TAM slot, Class I converbs can express the same range of evidentiality, mood, and tense distinctions as main verbs.

{| class="wikitable"
|+ Class I prefixes
! Prefix !! Type !! Gloss !! Clause relation
|-
| '''ki-''' || Purposive || "in order to" || purpose
|-
| '''ha-''' || Causal || "because (subject) did" || cause
|-
| '''sa-''' || Conditional || "if (subject) does" || condition
|-
| '''ra-''' || Concessive || "even though (subject) does" || concession
|-
| '''mu-''' || Instrumental || "by means of / using" || means
|-
| '''ne-''' || Adversative || "instead of" || substitution
|-
| '''ta-''' || Simultaneous || "while doing" || temporal overlap
|-
| '''tu-''' || Simulative || "as if doing" || comparison
|}

=== Day markers ===

Day markers insert between the verbal prefix and the lexical root. They indicate the temporal setting of the converb clause:

* '''go-''' — general day marker
* '''goki-''' — specific day marker
* '''go-IMP-''' — imperative day marker

== Class II: Suffix converbs ==

Class II converbs are formed with a '''suffix''' that replaces ("eats") the TAM slot. The suffix itself is '''day-sensitive''', meaning the choice of suffix form depends on when the event takes place.

Because Class II converbs lack a TAM slot, they cannot independently mark tense, aspect, or mood — these are inferred from context or the main clause.

{| class="wikitable"
|+ Class II suffixes
! Suffix !! Type !! Gloss
|-
| '''-shëlon''' || Posterior || "before"
|-
| '''-mulon''' || Anterior || "after / once"
|-
| '''-lon''' || Sequential || "right after"
|-
| '''-ndor''' || Terminative || "until"
|-
| '''-lok''' || Locative || "where"
|-
| '''-mutu''' || Simulative || "as though"
|-
| '''-rum''' || Beneficiary || "for the sake of"
|-
| '''-wom''' || Comitative || "together with"
|-
| '''-səf''' || Exceptive || "except for"
|-
| '''-vai''' || Restrictive || "only if/when"
|}

The Posterior (''-shëlon'') and Anterior (''-mulon'') suffixes are transparently built from an evidential/mood stem plus the sequential ''-lon''.

== Major subtypes ==

=== Causal converb ===

The '''causal converb''' (ha-) expresses reason or cause ("because", "since"). It is one of the two major Class I subtypes.

=== Conditional converb ===

The '''conditional converb''' (sa-) expresses conditionality ("if", "when"). It places '''heavy limitations''' on the allowed TAM categories.

==== TAM restrictions ====

The conditional converb '''cannot take visual evidentiality''', which is strictly [[Realis|realis]]. Only the following moods are permitted with the conditional converb:

{| class="wikitable"
! Mood !! Semantic force
|-
| [[Auditory]] || "someone else said" (reported)
|-
| Inferred || "I infer" (inferential)
|-
| Intentive || "I will" (prospective intention)
|-
| [[Optative]] || "I wish" (desiderative)
|-
| Deliberative || "should I?" (deliberative question)
|}

These restrictions reflect the inherently irrealis nature of conditional clauses — one cannot visually witness a hypothetical event.

=== Beneficiary converb ===

The '''beneficiary converb''' (''-rum'') marks an intended good or bad outcome for a third party, distinct from the purposive. Used for "I baked cookies for my friend" style constructions where the friend is the intended beneficiary rather than the purpose of the baking itself.

=== Instrumental converb ===

The '''instrumental converb''' (mu-) marks an instrumental indirect object. "I hit him by holding a hammer" uses this converb on ''hold''; the main verb is ''hit''. It is not an auxiliary verb — it introduces a means, not an auxiliary action.

[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]
