[[Category:Cases]]
The '''Dative case''' in Aelaki marks the recipient or beneficiary of an action. It also functions as a '''benefactive''' case. When the noun is in the negative number, the Dative instead operates as an '''ablative''' or '''malefactive''' case.

== Formation ==

The Dative case is formed by adding a ''-n'' ending to the person-marked stem. The inanimate form adds ''-ïn'' to the inanimate suffix, yielding ''-ïfïn''.

== Declension ==

Demonstrated with the feminine singular noun '''basol''' ("tree"):

{| class="wikitable"
! Person !! Form
|-
| 1st person || Basolthon
|-
| 2nd person || Basoljon
|-
| 3rd person || Basolshon
|-
| 4th person || Basolkon
|-
| Inanimate || Basïlïfïn
|}

== Benefactive and Malefactive ==

The Dative case has a dual nature depending on the number of the noun:

* In '''positive number''', it functions as a '''benefactive''' — marking the entity that benefits from or receives the action ("for", "to").
* In '''negative number''', it functions as an '''ablative''' or '''malefactive''' — marking the entity from which something is taken or the entity negatively affected by the action ("from", "against").

This polarity-based shift in meaning is a distinctive feature of Aelaki grammar.

== Case Hierarchy ==

The Dative case ranks second in the case hierarchy for verb agreement, immediately below [[Agent]]:

[[Agent]] > '''Dative''' > [[Patient]] > [[Instrumental]] > [[Possessive]] > [[Speaker]]

This high ranking means that when an Agent is absent, the verb agrees with the Dative noun phrase before any other case.

== See Also ==

* [[Agent]] - marks the subject of transitive/active verbs
* [[Patient]] - marks the object of transitive verbs
* [[Instrumental]] - marks the instrument, companion, or location
* [[Speaker]] - marks the source of reported information
* [[Possessive]] - marks genitive constructions

[[Category:git synced pages]]