[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]

[[Aelaki]] has no first person pronouns. Pronouns fell out of use long ago. Instead, speakers use various noun strategies to express first person reference. See also [[First_person]] and [[Pseudopronouns]].

== Types of first person nouns ==

=== 1. "My-type nouns" ===
Nouns that use the inalienable [[Possessive|possessive]] to describe something like a body part: my body, my name, my soul, my ass. These tend to be used to express nuances of the action happening.

=== 1.5. "1p→3p nouns" ===
"My-type nouns" that are declined in the [[Third_person|third person]] and used for specific grammatical contexts, mainly the quirky jussive and [[Optative|optative]]. You cannot use your name in a sentence like this — it is considered ungrammatical and would imply someone else with the same name. The possessive makes it clear that you are changing person.

=== 2. "Social nouns" ===
These imply a relationship between the speaker and other people in the conversation. The "me and you" noun is a common one. These are all [[Plural|plural]], and usually dyadic. Their pluralization works differently from regular nouns.

=== 3. "Common pronominalized nouns" ===
Common nouns or proper nouns declined in first person. This tends to be done in official contexts. A police officer might refer to themselves as "officer.1p.SING.MALE". Some people use their names like this, usually as a way of introducing themselves.

== See also ==
* [[First_person]]
* [[Pseudopronouns]]
* [[Possessive]]
* [[Ki_syllables]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]