The '''fourth person''' (also called the '''obviative''') is one of the four [[grammatical persons]] in Aelaki. It refers to an off-stage or backgrounded participant — someone not currently in the discourse focus.

== Ki Syllables ==

Fourth person [[Ki]] syllables vary by [[gender]]:

{| class="wikitable"
! Gender !! Ki Syllable !! Word-Final Form
|-
| Child || ku || -u
|-
| Female || ko || -o
|-
| Male || ka || -a
|-
| Inanimate || ïf / ïfïf || —
|}

== The Inanimate Gender ==

The fourth person is unique among Aelaki's grammatical persons in that it is the '''only''' person that supports the inanimate [[gender]], marked by ''ïf'' (singular) or ''ïfïf'' (plural). The [[first person]], [[second person]], and [[third person]] each distinguish only child, female, and male genders.

In Aelaki, inanimate gender represents uncountable or mass nouns (water, air, sand) rather than merely lifeless objects. Countable nouns use the child, female, or male genders instead.

== Distinction from Third Person ==

Where the [[third person]] marks the proximate or topical participant currently in focus, the fourth person marks participants who are off-stage or otherwise backgrounded in the discourse. This proximate/obviative distinction allows Aelaki to track multiple third-party referents without ambiguity.

== Verb Agreement ==

In verb agreement, fourth person Ki markers appear in the following positions:

* '''Transitive verbs''': prefix Ki (subject) and suffix Ki (object)
* '''Intransitive active verbs''': prefix Ki (subject)
* '''Intransitive stative verbs''': suffix Ki (subject)

== See Also ==

* [[First person]]
* [[Second person]]
* [[Third person]]
* [[Ki]]

[[Category:grammatical persons]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]