The '''gnomic aspect''' in Aelaki is the present-tense realization of the [[Telic|telic perfect]] aspect. It expresses universal truths, general statements, and timeless facts.

== Formation ==

The gnomic uses the same stem modification as the telic perfect: '''umlaut''' of the stem vowels.

Using the root ''zh-r-n'' "live" (base form: ''zharan''):

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Form !! Meaning
|-
| Base || zharan || (someone) lives
|-
| Gnomic (present) || zheren || lives (universal truth)
|-
| Telic perfect (past) || zheren || lived (life completed)
|}

The form ''zheren'' is identical in both cases; the gnomic or telic perfect reading depends on tense context.

== Usage ==

The gnomic aspect is used for statements that are considered universally or permanently true, such as proverbs, natural laws, and general characterizations. Where the telic perfect in past tense indicates a completed action whose goal was met, the gnomic in present tense indicates a truth that simply holds.

== Stative verbs ==

[[Stative verbs]] use the umlaut stem as their gnomic form. For example, ''zoduk'' "know" has the gnomic form ''zedik''. The gnomic is considered a form of '''completion''' — a universal truth is, in a sense, a completed fact about the world. This is why the gnomic shares the umlaut operation with the [[Telic|telic perfect]] and the [[Cessative|cessative]]: all three mark different kinds of completion.

Note that the habitual/gnomic distinction is maintained for stative verbs: the simple present form (''zoduk'') serves as the habitual ("I know things regularly"), while the umlaut form (''zedik'') is strictly gnomic ("it is universally known").

== Relationship to other aspects ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Past aspect !! Present realization
|-
| [[Atelic|Atelic perfect]] || [[Habitual]]
|-
| [[Continuous|Continuative]] || [[Continuous|Continuative]] (unchanged)
|-
| [[Telic|Telic perfect]] || '''Gnomic'''
|}

== See also ==

* [[Telic]]
* [[Habitual]]
* [[Perfect]]

[[Category:grammatical aspects]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]
