The '''hearsay evidential''' marks information that the speaker received through indirect report, tradition, or rumour rather than through direct perception. It shares the proto-morpheme '''-ro''' with the [[Auditory|auditory evidential]], and the two are often grouped together as the '''auditory/hearsay''' evidential system.

== Proto-morpheme ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Proto-morpheme !! Allomorphs !! Gloss !! Modern reflex
|-
| '''o / -ro''' || /o/ (prefix), -ro (suffix) || auditory / hearsay evidential || survives as '''-ro''' ([[Past|past]] reported), and in compounds across tenses
|}

The hearsay and [[Auditory|auditory]] evidentials share a single proto-morpheme, reflecting a historical stage when Aelaki did not distinguish between hearing an event and being told about it. The modern language distinguishes them primarily through context and the use of the [[Speaker]] case.

== Distinction from auditory ==

The key difference between hearsay and [[Auditory|auditory]] is the '''directness''' of the information:

{| class="wikitable"
! Feature !! [[Auditory]] !! Hearsay
|-
| Source || Direct hearing or in-person report || Indirect report, rumour, tradition
|-
| Speaker present? || Yes, when told || Not necessarily
|-
| Reliability || Higher || Lower
|-
| Typical use || "I heard him say it" || "They say that...", "It is said that..."
|}

Both use the same morphological forms ('''-ro''', '''-ngrom''', '''-rum'''), with disambiguation handled through context and the [[Speaker]] case. When the [[Speaker]] case is absent, the hearsay reading is preferred; when it is present, the auditory reading (with a specific named source) is more natural.

== Formation ==

The hearsay evidential uses the same tense forms as the [[Auditory|auditory]]:

{| class="wikitable"
! Tense !! Suffix !! Notes
|-
| [[Past]] || '''-ro''' || Base reported form
|-
| [[Hodiernal]] || '''-ngrom''' || Events reported as happening today
|-
| [[Future]] || '''-rum''' || Predictions or expectations based on what the speaker has heard
|}

== Usage ==

The hearsay evidential is used for:

* '''Indirect reports''' -- information passed through one or more intermediaries
* '''Rumour and gossip''' -- unverified information circulating in a community
* '''Oral tradition''' -- stories, legends, and cultural knowledge passed down through generations
* '''General knowledge''' -- facts the speaker learned from others but did not verify personally

== The Speaker case ==

In hearsay constructions, the [[Speaker]] case can optionally mark the ultimate source of the information. When the [[Speaker]] case is omitted, the implication is that the source is diffuse or unknown ("people say", "it is said").

== See also ==

* [[Auditory]] -- related evidential for directly heard events or in-person reports
* [[Visual]] -- evidential for directly witnessed events
* [[Inferential]] -- evidential for deduction from evidence
* [[Probable]] -- stative prefix for imminent/probable events
* [[Speaker]] -- case marking the source of reported information
* [[Mythic]] -- tense for deep legendary past, often used with hearsay evidentiality

[[Category:evidentialities]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]
