'''Inanimate''' is one of the four [[grammatical genders]] in [[Aelaki]]. Unlike the three animate genders ([[Child]], [[Female]], [[Male]]), which track biological life stages, the inanimate gender is reserved for non-living entities and mass nouns.

== Overview ==

In [[Aelaki]], inanimate gender represents uncountable or mass nouns such as water, air, and sand -- not merely lifeless objects. Countable nouns use one of the three animate genders ([[Child|child]], [[Female|female]], or [[Male|male]]) instead.

== Vowel pattern ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Number !! Vowel
|-
| Singular || '''if'''
|-
| Collective || —
|}

The inanimate gender has no collective vowel. It is uncountable by default.

== Ki syllable table ==

The inanimate gender has only a 4th person form, unlike the animate genders which distinguish all four persons:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Person !! Singular !! Reduplication
|-
| 4th person || if || ifif
|}

== Peculiarities ==

The inanimate gender has several unique grammatical restrictions:

* '''Uncountable by default.''' Reduplication may mark paucity versus plenty, but this is rarely used.
* '''Cannot take the /f/ infix.''' The inanimate vowel pattern already contains /f/, so the infix would be redundant.
* '''Cannot appear as the agent of dynamic verbs.''' When an inanimate noun must fill an agentive role syntactically, speakers insert a counter bearing one of the animate genders ([[Child]], [[Female]], or [[Male]]).

== Relationship to other genders ==

The inanimate gender stands apart from the animate gender system. While [[Child]], [[Female]], and [[Male]] track sequential hermaphroditic life stages, inanimate nouns do not participate in this progression. Gender assignment for borderline cases (invertebrates, artefacts) depends on perceived age or sound symbolism, with truly non-living or mass nouns receiving inanimate gender.

== See also ==

* [[Child]]
* [[Female]]
* [[Male]]

[[Category:grammatical genders]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]