__NOTOC__
== Welcome to {{SITENAME}}! ==
This is the wiki dedicated to the [[Aelaki language]].

Aelaki is a constructed language created by Immanuelle. It is spoken on the planet ngorno.

This wiki also covers Illish.

==Getting started with learning Aelaki==

# Learn the [[non-concatenative morphology]]
# Learn [[basic syntax]] first, then [[Phonology]]
# Learn the [[case system]]
# [[Interjections/particles]]
# Learn [[adjectives]]
# Learn [[verbs]]
## [[Active verbs]]
## [[Transitive verbs]]
## [[stative verbs]]

== Helping with the project ==

Two wiki pages track open work on the Aelaki language and this wiki:

* [[Unresolved questions]] — grammatical contradictions and documentation clashes between the wiki, the megadoc, and the Python morphology engine that require a manual ruling. Each item links to the exact source passage on GitHub. Edit this page directly when you notice something the three sources disagree on, or when you have a ruling to record.
* [[To-do list]] — mechanical implementation work: thin wiki pages to expand, missing pages to create, pipeline items, and maintenance tasks that do not require an ontological decision.

Both pages are kept in sync with the [https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/aelaki-wikibot aelaki-wikibot GitHub repository] so contributions made on-wiki flow back into the repo and vice versa.

== Worldbuilding ==

Aelaki is set on the planet Ngorno under a visible ring system. The planet's delta-dwelling culture and its religion are sketched on [[Ringworld culture building]] and [[Aelateun religion]].

== Maintenance ==

This wiki is maintained by the [[User:EmmaBot|EmmaBot]] account.

[[Category:Git synced pages]]