'''Nouns''' in [[Aelaki]] are built from triconsonantal or tetraconsonantal roots using templatic morphology. A noun's form encodes its '''gender''', '''number''', '''person''', and '''case''' through vowel patterns, reduplication, and suffixes.

== Root structure ==

Aelaki nouns are derived from consonantal roots, most commonly three consonants (triconsonantal):

{| class="wikitable"
! Root type !! Template !! Example
|-
| Triconsonantal || C₁-a-C₂-V-C₃-V || b-s-l → ''basol'' ("tree", female)
|-
| Tetraconsonantal || C₁-a-C₂-u-C₃-V-C₄-V || b-z-r-k → ''bazurok'' ("ocean", female)
|}

The vowel slots (V) are filled by the noun's inherent '''gender vowel'''.

== Gender ==

Every noun has one of four inherent [[Category:Grammatical genders|genders]]:

{| class="wikitable"
! Gender !! Vowel !! Semantic domain
|-
| [[Child]] || '''u''' || Pre-reproductive animate beings, young or small entities
|-
| [[Female]] || '''o''' || Reproductive-stage animate beings (female phase)
|-
| [[Male]] || '''a''' || Post-reproductive animate beings (male phase)
|-
| [[Inanimate]] || '''ïf''' || Uncountable/mass nouns (water, air, sand)
|}

Gender assignment reflects the sequential hermaphroditic biology of the speakers: child → female → male. [[Inanimate]] is reserved for truly uncountable nouns, not merely lifeless objects.

== Number ==

Animate nouns distinguish four numbers. Inanimate nouns distinguish only paucal and plentiful.

{| class="wikitable"
! Number !! Formation !! Example (b-s-l, female)
|-
| [[Singular]] || Base template || ''basol''
|-
| [[Plural]] (partitive) || Reduplication of C₂-V || ''basobol''
|-
| [[Collective]] || Back → front vowel shift || ''besel''
|-
| [[Zero]] || /f/ infix after gender vowel || ''basofzof''
|}

For [[Inanimate]] nouns, singular maps to '''paucal''' (a small amount) and plural maps to '''plentiful''' (a large amount). Collective and zero are not used.

== Person ==

Nouns take a '''person suffix''' marking the referent's discourse role:

{| class="wikitable"
! Person !! Suffix !! Usage
|-
| 1st || -th || Speaker
|-
| 2nd || -j || Addressee
|-
| 3rd || -sh || Other animate referent
|-
| 4th || (unmarked) || Default / inanimate
|}

Inanimate nouns only take 4th person (unmarked), since person distinctions are meaningless for mass nouns.

== Case ==

Nouns are marked for case via [[Ki_syllables|Ki syllable]] constructions. Animate nouns support six cases; inanimate nouns support three:

{| class="wikitable"
! Case !! Function !! Inanimate?
|-
| [[Agent]] || Subject of transitive/active verbs || No
|-
| [[Patient]] || Object of transitive verbs, subject of stative verbs || Yes
|-
| [[Possessive]] || Genitive (alienable and inalienable) || No
|-
| [[Instrumental]] || Instrument, companion, or location || Yes
|-
| [[Dative]] || Recipient or beneficiary || Yes
|-
| [[Speaker]] || Source of reported information || No
|}

Inanimate nouns cannot serve as agents because mass nouns cannot perform actions.

== See also ==

* [[Adjective]] — derived from stative verb stems, agrees with nouns in gender and number
* [[Ki_syllables]] — person-gender-number clitics used in verb agreement
* [[Pseudopronouns]] — nouns inflected with Ki suffixes for pragmatic nuance

[[Category:parts of speech]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]
