The '''phonology''' of [[Aelaki]] is built around a consonant-heavy root system with a symmetrical back/front vowel grid. Grammatical meaning is encoded primarily through vowel alternations and consonant operations rather than through linear affixation.

== Vowel inventory ==

Aelaki vowels are organized in a back/front grid. The '''collective''' vowel shift and '''umlaut''' both move vowels from back (left) to front (right):

{| class="wikitable"
! Height !! Back !! Front !! IPA (approx.)
|-
| High || '''u''' || '''i''' || /u/ /i/
|-
| Near-high || '''ü''' || '''ï''' || /ʊ/ /ɪ/
|-
| Mid || '''o''' || '''e''' || /o/ /e/
|-
| Low || '''a''' || '''æ''' || /ɑ/ /æ/
|}

'''ə''' (schwa) appears in grammatical affixes (verb TAM prefixes, [[Converbs|converbs]]) but does not participate in the vowel grid.

'''ë''' appears in evidential suffixes (''-shë'', ''-shëm'', ''-shëlon'') and the temporal adposition ''Slë''. Its exact status (schwa variant or distinct phoneme) is under analysis.

== Consonant inventory ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Manner !! Consonants
|-
| Stops || p, b, t, d, k, g
|-
| Affricates || ch, j
|-
| Fricatives || f, v, s, z, sh, zh, th, dh, h
|-
| Nasals || m, n, ng
|-
| Liquids & glides || l, r, w, y
|}

== Phonological processes ==

=== Vowel shift (umlaut / collective) ===

The same back → front vowel shift is used in multiple grammatical contexts:

{| class="wikitable"
! Context !! Effect !! Example
|-
| [[Noun]] collective number || Back vowels → front || ''basol'' → ''besel'' (tree, collective)
|-
| Verb perfective-completed || Back vowels → front || ''Dapaz'' → ''Dæpæz'' (shot, completed)
|-
| [[Adjective]] superlative || Back vowels → front || ''koran'' → ''kœrœn'' (brightest)
|-
| [[Stative_verbs|Stative verb]] gnomic || Back vowels → front || ''zoduk'' → ''zedik'' (universally known)
|}

Shift mapping: u→i, ü→ï, o→e, a→æ, ə→æ. Front vowels are unchanged.

=== /f/ infix (negation / zero) ===

The /f/ infix is inserted after a gender vowel to mark negation or zero quantity:

* Verbs: ''Dapaz'' → ''Dapfaz'' ("did not shoot")
* Nouns: ''basol'' → ''basofzof'' (zero trees)
* Yes/no: ''Su'' (yes) / ''Fu'' (no) — but this is lexicalized, not the infix

The /f/ infix does '''not''' apply to [[Inanimate|inanimate]] nouns because their gender vowel '''ïf''' already contains /f/.

=== Reduplication ===

C₂-V reduplication serves multiple grammatical functions:

* Nouns: partitive [[Plural|plural]] (''basol'' → ''basobol'')
* Verbs: imperfective / [[Continuous|continuous]] aspect (''Dapaz'' → ''Dapapaz'')
* Adjectives: [[Comparative|comparative]] degree (''koran'' → ''kororan'')
* [[Ki_syllables]]: plural agreement (''thu'' → ''thuthu'')
* [[Stative_verbs|Stative]] prefixes: continuative (''nü-'' → ''nünü-'')

=== Degemination ===

Aelaki does not permit geminate consonants. When morpheme boundaries produce identical adjacent consonants (e.g. ''rr'', ''shsh''), one copy is dropped. Multi-character consonants (sh, ch, th, dh, zh, ng) are handled as units.

=== Hodiernal sandhi ===

When the hodiernal prefix ''go-'' is used with a following TAM suffix, the consonant cluster ''-nk-'' is inserted between the stem and the suffix.

== Gender vowels ==

Each [[Category:Grammatical genders|gender]] has a characteristic vowel that fills the template slots in nouns:

{| class="wikitable"
! Gender !! Singular vowel !! Collective vowel
|-
| [[Child]] || u || i
|-
| [[Female]] || o || e
|-
| [[Male]] || a || æ
|-
| [[Inanimate]] || ïf || ïf (no change)
|}

== Person consonants ==

Person marking uses a consistent set of consonants across the system ([[Ki_syllables]], case suffixes, verb agreement):

{| class="wikitable"
! Person !! Consonant !! Noun suffix
|-
| 1st || th || -th
|-
| 2nd || j || -j
|-
| 3rd || sh || -sh
|-
| 4th || k || (unmarked)
|}

== Historical sound changes ==

=== The Great L Shift ===

A major historical sound change affected /l/ in different positions:
* Word-initial ''l-'' → ''l-'' (unchanged)
* Medial ''-l-'' → ''-ʎ-'' (lateralized)
* Word-final ''-l'' → ''-i'' (vocalized)

Example chain: ''Sakel'' → ''Sakei'' → ''Saki'' → ''Soki'' → ''Sok''

== See also ==

* [[Aelaki]] — language overview
* [[Noun]] — templatic noun morphology
* [[Verb]] — verb classes and conjugation
* [[Adjective]] — adjective morphology

[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]
