The '''probable''' is a stative aspect prefix in Aelaki that indicates an event is imminent or highly likely. Unlike the suffix-based [[Visual|visual]], [[Auditory|auditory]], and [[Inferential|inferential]] evidentials, the probable uses the prefix '''Ho-''' and applies exclusively to stative verbs.

== Formation ==

The probable is formed by prefixing '''Ho-''' (with a glottal stop before the following root) to a stative verb:

{| class="wikitable"
! Base verb !! Meaning !! With Ho- !! Meaning
|-
| ''apafath'' || "to fall" || '''Ho'apafath''' || "I am about to fall" / "I am probably falling"
|}

The prefix attaches directly to the stative verb stem. The glottal stop (''') separates the prefix from vowel-initial roots.

== Usage ==

The probable prefix expresses two closely related meanings:

* '''Imminence''' -- the event is about to happen ("I am about to fall")
* '''Probability''' -- the event is likely or expected ("it is probably raining")

Both readings arise naturally from stative contexts, where the speaker perceives a current state that points strongly toward an outcome.

== Distinction from the inferential ==

The probable and the [[Inferential|inferential]] evidential both relate to uncertainty, but they differ in a crucial way: '''Ho-''' expresses '''certainty''' about an imminent event, while the inferential expresses '''deduction''' from indirect evidence.

{| class="wikitable"
! Feature !! Probable ('''Ho-''') !! [[Inferential]] ('''-shëm / -mu''')
|-
| Morphology || prefix || suffix
|-
| Verb type || stative verbs only || all verbs
|-
| Temporal focus || present / imminent || past ('''-shëm''') or future ('''-mu''')
|-
| Meaning || certainty of imminence || deduction from indirect evidence
|-
| Speaker's basis || direct perception of current state || reasoned conclusion
|}

A speaker uses '''Ho-''' when they are '''certain''' something is about to happen — for example, seeing a person on a cliff with their rope breaking. This is not a guess; it is a confident assessment based on the current state.

== Stacking with evidentials ==

'''Ho-''' can combine with evidential suffixes, but the combined meaning shifts:

* '''Ho-zoduk-oth-shë''' — "I can see he is about to know" (certain, visually confirmed)
* '''Ho-zoduk-oth-ro''' — "I heard he is about to know" (the speaker was told about the imminent state — e.g., someone reported the person doesn't have a good rope)
* '''Ho-zoduk-oth-mu''' — "I infer he is about to know" (the speaker reasons from indirect evidence that the state is imminent)

The '''Ho-''' prefix retains its meaning of imminence in all cases. The evidential suffix then specifies '''how the speaker knows''' about that imminent state, rather than expressing additional uncertainty.

== See also ==

* [[Inferential]] -- evidential for deduction from evidence
* [[Visual]] -- evidential for directly witnessed events
* [[Auditory]] -- evidential for events heard directly
* [[Hearsay]] -- evidential for reported information

[[Category:evidentialities]]
[[Category:Stative aspects]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]