'''Pseudopronouns''' are a distinctive feature of [[Aelaki]] morphosyntax. Canonical pronouns have disappeared from the language; instead, [[Ki_syllables|Ki]] endings carry person information directly on the verb. Pseudopronouns are '''full nouns''' inflected with Ki suffixes to supply additional pragmatic nuance beyond what bare Ki agreement provides.

== Inventory ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Pseudopronoun !! Meaning !! Notes
|-
| '''Thijith''' || 'you and me (alone)' || [[Child]] gender, exclusive dual
|-
| '''Thishith''' || 'you and me (and a few others)' || Inclusive paucal
|-
| '''Thikith''' || 'you and me (and many others)' || Inclusive plural
|-
| '''Dzahabath''' || 'mother-child pair (1st person)' || Root ''dzahab'' + 1sg Ki
|-
| '''Dzahahabath''' || 'we (many mother-child pairs)' || Collective + plural Ki
|-
| '''Gatharath''' || 'my body' || Pedagogical 1sg
|-
| '''Pathasath''' || 'my name' || Pedagogical 1sg
|}

== Usage ==

Pseudopronouns are used when speakers want to convey social or pragmatic information that plain Ki agreement cannot express. For instance, ''Thijith'' specifically signals an exclusive "you and me, no one else" relationship — a nuance that the regular first person inclusive Ki forms do not capture.

The pedagogical pseudopronouns ''Gatharath'' ("my body") and ''Pathasath'' ("my name") are typically used in teaching and introductory contexts.

== Quirky Jussive ==

Pseudopronouns play a special role in the '''quirky jussive''' construction. A '''third person pseudopronoun''' is used in place of a first or second person form in jussive (imperative/command) clauses. This substitution implies a '''loss of agency''' — the speaker or addressee is being commanded as if they were a third party, suggesting compulsion or inevitability.

[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]
