'''Random sentences''' collects short, self-contained [[Aelaki]] sentences that have been worked out in full during development — usually on the conlangs-server Discord corpus — and that do not belong to the structured [[Test_sentences|test-sentences list]]. They are preserved here as primary-source attestations with dates, so that later grammar changes can be checked against actual produced text.

Dates in parentheses refer to the Discord message where the sentence was first posted by the author (kamidere, #conlangs channel unless noted).

== Formulaic sentences ==

=== "May the force be with you" (2025-05-29) ===

: '''Forsash Zi Gojaroj Ne Jæsangangazya'''

Morphemes:

: force-MASC.SING.3p ''and.exhaustive'' >2p.FEM.POS<body-2p.FEM.SING ''TOPIC_UNIFIER'' 2p.MASC.COLL-walk.CONT-OPT.FUTURE

Notes: Uses the exhaustive coordinator ''zi'' between the agent ("force") and the body-possessive pseudopronoun ("your body" for "you"), then the topic unifier ''ne'' before the optative-future verb "walk". The sentence cleanly demonstrates the [[Pseudopronouns|body-pronoun construction]] for second person.

=== "Long live the king" (2025-05-29) ===

: '''Sanash Shazhærænya Zadateya'''

Morphemes:

: king-3p.MASC.SING 3p.MASC.SING-live.CONT-OPT.FUTURE long-ADV-OPT.FUTURE

Notes: Both the verb and the adverb take the optative-future suffix ''-ya'', reflecting Aelaki's requirement that TAM concord propagate to any adverb modifying the predicate.

== Discourse-length sentences ==

=== Car-crash sentence (2025-06-04) ===

: '''Gothozapapayashë Vothonüdïf Sægetlæræchïfïshë Nono Hagebilidïfïshë Sakadïf'''

Morphemes:

: HOD-1p.FEM.SING-drive.IMP-PAST.VIS >1p.FEM.SING.POS<windshield-INAN.4p SIM.CONV-HOD-be_hit.COMP-INAN.4p-VIS.PAST TOPIC_SHIFT CAUS.CONV-HOD-fly.COMP-INAN.4p-VIS.PAST rock-4p.SING.INAN

Approximate translation: "I was driving, my windshield got hit, ''nono'' a rock caused [it] to fly." See [[Switch_references]] for the topic-shift mechanism.

Note: The form '''[[Sægetlæræchïfïshë]]''' is marked in [[To-do list#Sægetlæræchïfïshë (single manual parse)|Aelaki grammar todo]] as having nonstandard romanization and is still pending manual morpheme analysis.

=== "Let us meet tomorrow morning" (2025-05-26) ===

: '''Gothaefïfïlgom ngugoyaklon Goyakak Shushu'''

Morphemes:

: CRAST-1PL.INC.MASC-IMPERATIVE.meet BEFORE-early_in_day-BEFORE early_in_day-MASC.SING.4p DISCOURSE_PARTICLE

Notes: The adverbial ''goyakak'' "early in day" takes masculine singular 4th-person agreement; ''ngu-...-lon'' brackets it into a Class II converb, and ''shushu'' is the discourse particle.

=== Henry sentence (2025-05-31) ===

: '''Rühüngush Shashabechekushkashrom ka Bazhashya Kühüngash nono Ëkutashashë Kühüngash Nühofuglon'''

Notes: All-masculine-subject sentence, flagged in the original post as harder than expected because of gender agreement. Preserved verbatim as a work-in-progress attestation; a full gloss has not yet been produced.

== Weather verbs ==

=== "It's raining." (2025-06-05) ===

: '''Sharokasoro'''

Weather verbs take a fixed agreement pattern: '''masculine subject, feminine object''', traditionally analyzed as "a part of the sky (masc.) acts on a part of the ground (fem.)". They are much more actively conjugated in sentences than in most natural languages (''source: Discord conlangs-server, 2025-06-05''). See [[Word_order#Weather verbs|Word order]] for the agreement convention.

== See also ==

* [[Test_sentences]] — structured translation list from the cofl conlang syntax test cases
* [[Switch_references]]
* [[Word_order]]
* [[Pseudopronouns]]

[[Category:Aelaki]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]