In realms where heaven's ring encircles skies above, [Introduce the setting: The heavenly ring of water]
A cascade eternal, from celestial seas it dives.
This ring, an ocean hanging in the heavens high,
Feeds rivers below with waters that never dry.

Gods in their lofty abode, with watchful eyes, [Introduce the gods and their perspective]
Gazed upon the earth, where verdant forests lie.
Their sight caught Maomaos and monkeys in their play,
Creatures of vibrant spirit, yet touched by solitude's sway.

Maomaos, bear-sized beings, red-furred and bright, [Describe the Maomaos]
With dog-like mirth in each joyful, bounding flight.
And monkeys, agile, clever, leaping tree to tree,
In their eyes, a longing, a silent plea.

Moved by their quiet loneliness, the gods convened, [Gods' decision to intervene]
To discuss the fate of these beings, earthly and serene.
A bridge they sought to form, from sky to land,
To bring companionship's touch by a celestial hand.

From heavens descended Aeliron, first of man, [Introduce Aeliron]
"He Who Bridges Sky and Earth," as per the divine plan.
Like Ninigi, like Nigihayahi, of ancient lore,
A celestial grace he bore, wisdom of sky and earth's core.

To the earth, he brought a union, a sacred bond, [Aeliron's role and actions]
Marrying four monkeys, a connection beyond.
Not of romance, but of guardianship and respect,
A symbol of unity, of celestial and terrestrial connect.

Five Maomaos, with fur of twilight's red hue,
Met Aeliron's gaze, their curiosity grew.
He offered fruits, plucked from heavenly trees,
A celestial gift, eating which, Maomaos' spirits were set free.

Transformed they were, from earthly creatures alone,
To guardians bonded, around Aeliron's throne.
Thus was born the era of sky and earth as one, [Concluding the introduction]
Where gods walked the forests, under the setting sun.
Aeliron, the bridge, the first of his kind,
In his guidance and protection, peace they did find.

See also [[Ringworld culture building]] and [[Ringworld basic syntax words]].

[[Category:Ringworld]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]