'''TAM''' (tense-aspect-mood) is the combined system of morphology that marks ''when'' an event happens, ''how'' it unfolds, and the ''speaker's stance'' toward it in [[Aelaki]]. The three dimensions are not orthogonal — evidentiality and mood frequently shift the apparent tense, and some aspects are restricted to particular tense/evidential combinations.

See [[Verb]] for general verb structure, [[Evidentialities]] for evidential morphology, and [[Converbs]] for how TAM interacts with subordinate clauses.

== Dimensions ==

=== Tense ===

Three core frames: [[Past]], [[Present]], [[Future]]. Additional graded tenses ([[Hesternal]], [[Hodiernal]], [[Crastinal]], [[Mythic]]) are derived from the core three via day prefixes.

=== Aspect ===

* '''Imperfective''' — default; action in progress or unbounded.
* '''Habitual''' — suffix '''-d'eb''''; action characterises the subject.
* '''Gnomic''' — stem reduplication; general/universal truth. Overrides other plural markings.
* '''Telic perfective''' — infix '''-m'eu'''; completed, goal-achieved.
* '''Atelic perfective''' — infix '''-pihn'''; completed but unbounded, "ran until they stopped".

=== Evidentiality ===

Four evidentials are marked on the verb itself:

* '''Visual''' — default present; particle '''bha''' (from "see") on past tense.
* '''Auditory / second-hand''' — particle '''dibv'''; covers both literal hearing and reported speech.
* '''Inferential''' — particle '''eux''' (past, from "smell", metaphorical) or '''agh''' (future, from "think").
* '''Second-hand (gnomic default)''' — used for universal statements, because the speaker cannot directly witness generic claims.

Evidentials can shift the apparent tense: inferential defaults to past in the past tense, and to future in the present tense.

=== Mood ===

* '''Indicative''' — unmarked.
* '''Intentive''' — '''-vo'''; implies a plan the speaker was in on. Not for warning the police about a criminal.
* '''Admonitive''' — '''-d'id'''; "I'm afraid they will". Not an inverse imperative — use negation+imperative for that. Second-person use implies the subject acts unwillingly (genuine concern or mafia-style threat).
* '''[[Optative]]''' — '''-laex'''; "they should". Imperative force in 1st/2nd person, optative in 3rd/4th.
* '''Deliberative''' — '''-ga'''; snappy yes-no question ("should they?"). Inside the verb rather than the free yes-no particle ''ga''. For philosophical questions, use ''-zoga''.

== Worked paradigm: ''exu'' "run" ==

The verb '''exu''' "run" illustrates the full TAM matrix. Morphemes are shown with hyphens; surface forms appear where simple concatenation misrepresents the actual pronunciation.

=== Present ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Evidential !! Morphemes !! Surface !! Gloss
|-
| imperfective || visual || exu || ''exu'' || they are running
|-
| imperfective habitual || visual || exu-d'eb' || ''exud'eb''' || they run (habitually)
|-
| imperfective || auditory || exu-laen-dibv || — || they are running (I hear)
|-
| imperfective habitual || auditory || exu-laen-dibv-d'eb' || — || (habitual, heard)
|-
| gnomic || second-hand (default) || exu-exu-belel || ''exuxubelel'' || they run (as a characterisation)
|-
| imperfective || inferential || exu-laen-agh || — || they are running (I infer)
|-
| gnomic || inferential || exu-exu-laen-agh-belel || — || gnomic inferential
|}

Gnomic always reduplicates the stem and overwrites any other plural markings. It defaults to second-hand evidentiality because the speaker cannot directly witness a generic claim.

=== Past ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Evidential !! Morphemes !! Surface !! Gloss
|-
| imperfective || visual || exu-bha || ''exubha'' || they were running (I saw)
|-
| imperfective || auditory || exu-dibv || ''exudibv'' || they were running (I heard)
|-
| imperfective || inferential || exu-eux || ''exeuxu'' || they ran (by inference)
|-
| telic perfective || visual || exu-m'eu || ''exum'eu'' || they ran (to their destination)
|-
| telic perfective || auditory || exu-dibv-m'eu || ''exum'eu'' || (heard, telic)
|-
| atelic perfective || visual || exu-pihn || ''exupihn'' || they ran (until they stopped)
|-
| atelic perfective || inferential || exu-eux-pihn || ''exupihn'' || (inferred, atelic)
|}

The past visual '''bha''' is not by itself a reliable past indicator — other particles can move the statement back into the past or out into the future again.

=== Future ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Mood !! Morphemes !! Surface !! Gloss
|-
| imperfective || inferential || exu-agh || ''exaghu'' || they will run (I infer)
|-
| imperfective || intentive || exu-vo || ''exuvo'' || they will run (by plan)
|-
| imperfective || admonitive || exu-d'id || ''exud'id'' || I fear they will run
|-
| imperfective || optative || exu-laex || ''exulaex'' || they should run
|-
| imperfective || deliberative || exu-ga || ''exuga'' || should they run?
|-
| telic perfective || intentive || exu-vo-m'eu || ''exuvom'eu'' || they will run to (by plan)
|-
| atelic perfective || intentive || exu-vo-pihn || ''exuvopihn'' || they will run (unbounded, by plan)
|-
| telic perfective || deliberative || exu-ga-m'eu || ''exugam'eu'' || should they run there?
|-
| atelic perfective || deliberative || exu-ga-pihn || ''exugapihn'' || should they run?
|}

The inferential particle '''agh''' (from "think") moves the statement into the future; it is infixed rather than suffixed for sound-rule reasons. Habitual '''-d'eb'''' combines freely with each perfective.

== Notes ==

* Present visual is the default reading of an unmarked finite verb.
* The gnomic reduplication is morphologically distinctive: it is the only aspect that overrides plural marking on the stem.
* Inferential shifts an otherwise-present verb into the future, and an otherwise-past verb further into the past — the tense arrow is ''away from'' the speaker.

[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]
