The '''telic perfect''' is one of the two perfect aspects in Aelaki (alongside the [[Atelic|atelic perfect]]). It expresses a completed action whose goal or endpoint has been reached.

== Formation ==

The telic perfect is formed through '''umlaut''' (vowel fronting) of the stem vowels.

Using the root ''zh-r-n'' "live" (base form: ''zharan''):

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Form !! Pattern !! Meaning
|-
| Base || zharan || C₁V₁C₂V₂C₃ || (someone) lives
|-
| Telic perfect || zheren || umlaut || lived (life completed)
|}

The telic perfect indicates that the action has been completed and its inherent goal or natural endpoint was achieved. ''Zheren'' implies that a complete life was lived to its conclusion.

== Umlaut as completion ==

The umlaut operation consistently marks '''completion''' across Aelaki grammar. Three key uses share this underlying semantics:

{| class="wikitable"
! Use !! Example !! Meaning !! Why "completion"
|-
| '''Telic perfect''' || zheren || lived (life completed) || Action reached its natural endpoint
|-
| '''[[Gnomic]]''' || zedik || universally known || A universal truth is a completed fact about the world
|-
| '''[[Cessative]]''' || nïzedik || forget (stop knowing) || A state has reached its endpoint — it is complete
|}

This shared morphology is not coincidental: telic completion, gnomic truth, and cessation are all expressions of the same concept of finality or wholeness. The [[Collective|collective]] number (e.g., ''Basel'' "all the trees") also uses umlaut, marking totality — another form of completion.

== Present tense: Gnomic ==

In the present tense, the telic perfect form takes on a '''[[Gnomic|gnomic]]''' meaning, expressing universal truths and timeless statements rather than completed events.

{| class="wikitable"
! Tense !! Form !! Meaning
|-
| Past || zheren || lived (life completed)
|-
| Present || zheren || lives (universal truth)
|}

== Contrast with atelic perfect ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Form !! Meaning !! Telicity
|-
| [[Atelic|Atelic perfect]] || zhoron || is alive (state achieved) || unbounded, no inherent endpoint
|-
| Telic perfect || zheren || lived (life completed) || bounded, goal reached
|}

== See also ==

* [[Atelic]]
* [[Perfect]]
* [[Gnomic]]

[[Category:Continuities?]]