'''To-do list''' is the project-level backlog for the [[Aelaki]] wiki and its [https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/aelaki-wikibot Python morphology engine]. It tracks '''mechanical''' work — things that need to be written, expanded, or wired up, not linguistic contradictions that require a ruling. For documentation clashes the three sources (wiki, megadoc, Python) disagree on, see [[Unresolved questions]] instead.

Items here are expected to be worked through incrementally, often by automated passes against [https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/aelaki-wikibot the repo]. When an item is finished, delete it.

==Unsorted==


Figure out why the heck non-lemma pages are not getting upgraded

Change the production to be a bit different. I want there to be two different kinds of workflows: production workflows which are on a daily cron, and development workflows which are on push

Development pushes make 10 word pages and 10 from wanted pages

Production does 50 and 50

Development has a maximum of 20 created pages

Shared budget is down to 200 a day shared by both. And each one can cap at 100 for production and 20 for development. 

Production run is done last thing in the day, using up 100. So you can theoretically do say 6 production push runs, so 120 pages made, and as a result the production push caps off at 80 pages made (50 lemmas and 30 non-lemmas)

Remove all references to "Allochy" from the repo, that was just a hallucination

== Wiki pages to expand ==

These are wiki pages that exist but are thin or stub-like. Each expansion should cite <code>aelaki/*.py</code> as the source of truth for any inflected form, and pull attestations from the discord corpus (<code>data lake/all_aelaki_messages.md</code>, <code>data lake/topic_*.md</code>) where available, using the inline italic format ''(source: Discord conlangs-server, YYYY-MM-DD)''.

=== Thin pages (15–29 lines) ===

* [[Positive]] — comprehensive mood paradigms and contrastive examples
* [[Present]] — formation details and tense interaction
* [[Quirky optative]] — examples and detailed paradigms
* [[Collective]] — syntax and agreement details on top of the evolution section
* [[Comparative]] — coverage for all word classes
* [[Deliberative]] — usage contexts and full paradigms
* [[First person nouns]] — needs substantial expansion beyond the current sketch
* [[Mythic]] — usage patterns with hearsay evidential
* [[Superlative]] — parallel expansion alongside Comparative
* [[Contact influence]] — more language-contact examples
* [[Imperative]] — more examples and mood interactions
* [[Plural]] — self-contained description rather than pointer to [[Aelaki plural]]

=== Moderate pages (30–44 lines) ===

* [[Adpositions]] — paradigmatic tables and more examples
* [[Copula]] — irregular forms and historical development
* [[Pseudopronouns]] — more usage context
* [[Negative]] — /f/ infix interaction with different word classes
* [[Optative]] — mood distinctions

== Wiki pages to create ==

* [[Cohortative]] — "let us..." construction, referenced in [[Optative]] and [[Intentional]] but no page yet.
* [[Realis]] — realis mood, referenced in [[Converbs]] but no page.
* Converb-type explainer pages. Only [[Instrumental]] currently exists as a dedicated page; the other types (Purposive, Causal, Conditional, Concessive, Adversative, Simultaneous, Shared-cause, Shared-intent, Posterior, Anterior, Sequential, Terminative, Locative, Simulative, Comitative, Exceptive, Restrictive) currently redirect to or are explained only on [[Converbs]]. Stub pages with a brief gloss + link back to [[Converbs]] would improve navigation.
* A pedagogical '''Getting started''' page or learning path beyond the short section on [[Aelaki]].
* '''Complex syntax''' coverage — subordination, coordination, multi-clause constructions beyond [[Switch references]] and the stub [[Basic syntax]].

== Page name collisions and potential duplicates ==

The repository has several wiki pages whose titles collide, overlap semantically, or are near-duplicates of each other. Each entry below lists the repo file (<code>grammar/PAGE.wiki</code>) alongside the wiki link ([[PAGE]]). Resolving these requires a per-pair judgment — merge, redirect, rename with hatnote, or leave as-is — so they are collected here rather than auto-fixed.

=== Semantic overload (same title, distinct concepts) ===

* <code>Instrumental.wiki</code> → [[Instrumental]] — currently documents the '''noun case''' and '''verb argument'''. The '''instrumental converb''' (mu- prefix) is a separate concept that should live on its own page (e.g. [[Instrumental converb]]) with a hatnote from [[Instrumental]]. The existing coverage of case + verb argument staying on one article is intentional.
* <code>Locative</code>, <code>Comitative</code>, <code>Simulative</code> as converbs — [[Converbs]] lists these as converb types, but [[Instrumental]] already describes instrumental/comitative/locative as semantic functions of the case. Any future stub pages must be disambiguated (e.g. [[Locative converb]], [[Comitative converb]], [[Simulative converb]]).

=== Case-only collision (probable filesystem / title-case bug) ===

* <code>Heavenly_Stems.wiki</code> → [[Heavenly Stems]] vs <code>Heavenly_stems.wiki</code> → [[Heavenly stems]] — file contents are '''byte-identical'''. One should be deleted or turned into a redirect; pick the canonical capitalization.

=== Identical content, differing titles (likely redirect candidates) ===

* <code>Active.wiki</code> → [[Active]] vs <code>Active_verb.wiki</code> → [[Active verb]] — byte-identical. A third variant <code>Active_verbs.wiki</code> → [[Active verbs]] differs; decide which is canonical.
* <code>Ki.wiki</code> → [[Ki]] vs <code>Ki_syllable.wiki</code> → [[Ki syllable]] — byte-identical. <code>Ki_syllables.wiki</code> → [[Ki syllables]] differs.

=== Near-duplicates / singular-plural / derivational pairs (judgment calls) ===

* <code>Adjective.wiki</code> → [[Adjective]] vs <code>Adjectives.wiki</code> → [[Adjectives]]
* <code>Active_verb.wiki</code> → [[Active verb]] vs <code>Active_verbs.wiki</code> → [[Active verbs]]
* <code>Aelaki_plural.wiki</code> → [[Aelaki plural]] vs <code>Plural.wiki</code> → [[Plural]] — already flagged in the Thin pages section above; the intent is to make [[Plural]] self-contained.
* <code>Cess.wiki</code> → [[Cess]] vs <code>Cessative.wiki</code> → [[Cessative]]
* <code>Habitual.wiki</code> → [[Habitual]] vs <code>Habitual_form.wiki</code> → [[Habitual form]]
* <code>Intention.wiki</code> → [[Intention]] vs <code>Intentional.wiki</code> → [[Intentional]]
* <code>Mythic.wiki</code> → [[Mythic]] vs <code>Mythical.wiki</code> → [[Mythical]]
* <code>Quirky_jussive.wiki</code> → [[Quirky jussive]] vs <code>Quirky_optative.wiki</code> → [[Quirky optative]] — not strictly duplicates, but parallel constructions whose relationship should be stated on each page.

=== Lexicon / roots trio (already flagged elsewhere) ===

* <code>Aelaki_Lexicon.wiki</code> → [[Aelaki Lexicon]], <code>Aelaki_roots.wiki</code> → [[Aelaki roots]], <code>List_of_Aelaki_roots.wiki</code> → [[List of Aelaki roots]] — see the "Lexicon page issue" section below for the intended merge/redirect plan.

== Fixing up Lexicon issues ==

On the page [[List of Aelaki roots]] there are some pages that are linked but do not exist. Figure out why they do not exist since they should exist and have it so the generator eventually makes them.

==Images==

Many images are missing from this wiki. Check [[Special:WantedFiles]] and cross-reference it with C:\Users\Immanuelle\Documents\Github\order.life\wikibase\images to see if any of the wanted files are there. If there are wanted filrs that are in that directory then please upload them here

We might work towards git syncing images with this repo too but that is another step beyond this immediate thing

== Auto-generated verb word pages ==

* '''Verify the Converb section renders correctly on the live wiki.''' The word-page generator at <code>wiki-scripts/create_word_pages.py</code> emits a Converbs section for every verb lemma, pulling forms from <code>aelaki/converbs.py</code>. The tables need a sanity check on aelaki.miraheze.org once the next pipeline run deploys them — confirm agreement with <code>Converbs.wiki</code>, check wikitext renders as a table not literal pipes, confirm row links resolve.
* '''Word-page v2 format.''' <code>create_word_pages.py</code> currently emits <code>{{wordpage|v1}}</code>. v2 needs: pronunciation / phonetic transcription, etymology section linking to proto-Aelaki roots, example sentences from the discord corpus, TAM-grouped verb inflection tables, possession paradigms for nouns, cross-links between morphologically related lemmas (e.g. <code>bsl</code> noun ↔ <code>bsl_adj</code> adjective). Companion <code>update_word_pages.py</code> finds pages tagged <code>{{wordpage|v1}}</code> and regenerates them.
* '''Automatic new-word ingestion from the discord corpus.''' <code>data lake/dictionary.md</code> and <code>data lake/topic_*.md</code> hold ~120 unique Aelaki word forms. Extend <code>extract_discord_aelaki.py</code> (or a successor) to identify forms not yet in <code>aelaki/lexicon.py</code>, propose them with best-guess roots + gender, and feed them into the lexicon. Goal: every documented discord form ends up with a <code>word:LEMMA</code> page.

== Pipeline and state ==

* '''State-file audit.''' <code>create_word_pages.state</code> may hold stale entries from renamed keys (e.g. <code>dzhbhr → jbhr</code>). A general review of all pipeline state files (<code>*.state</code>, <code>*.last</code>) and their failure modes under <code>set -euo pipefail</code> is overdue. The annual reconciliation step (<code>reconcile_state.py</code>) is wired but other state files have not had the same pass.

== Sægetlæræchïfïshë (single manual parse) ==

* '''Parse Sægetlæræchïfïshë into morphemes.''' Appears in the 2025-06-04 car-crash glossed sentence ([[Random sentences]], [[Test sentences]]). Discord gloss is <code>SIM.CONV-HOD-be_hit.COMP-INAN.4p-VIS.PAST</code> but the surface string does not match that skeleton under any current verb root. Once parsed, write the decomposition up on [[Verb]] as a worked example. (Also tracked on [[Unresolved questions]] because the competing glosses are a synthesis call, not purely mechanical.)
* Imo it is most likely not a real word, and not worth dweling on. Did we find anything interesting in the car-crash sentence?

==Lexicon page issue==

* Square the circle of [[Aelaki Lexicon]] and [[List of Aelaki roots]]
* Most likely this involves a full history merge. Move [[Aelaki Lexicon]] -> [[List of Aelaki roots]]
* However the Lexicon page might be best repurposed into something. So do not just randomly commit to doing this. 
* Big issue is that [[Aelaki Lexicon]] is the oldest comprehensive word list, and [[List of Aelaki roots]] is the current one. So history wise the merge might make sentences
* Current Intention
** Study the content of [[Aelaki Lexicon]]
** Upgrade the format of [[List of Aelaki roots]] to one influenced by [[Aelaki Lexicon]]
** Move [[Aelaki Lexicon]] -> [[List of Aelaki roots]] with deletion, and then restore revision visibility to preserve history
** Edit [[List of Aelaki roots]] to give some kind of an introduction explanantion of the history
** [[Aelaki Lexicon]] is now a single revision redirect. Turn it into a hatnote leading there and make the article discussing the actual content of the Lexicon

== Zodiac / sexagenary-cycle pages ==

The 60-entry sexagenary-cycle pages ('''Yang_Fire_Horse''', '''Yang_Earth_Monkey''', …) sit in the grammar namespace but have a muddled history — they were seeded from a different project and not all of them are structurally clean. They do not block the language work but should eventually be swept:

* Actually make them consistent with the page [[The divine 60]] because the entire concept comes from Asian stuff but is pretty different on Ngorno
* Audit every <code>Yang_*</code> and <code>Yin_*</code> page against [[The divine 60]] and [[Sexagenary cycle]] for consistency of headers, categories, and cross-links.
* Confirm every page in [[:Category:Sexagenary cycle]] has at least one incoming link besides the category (the orphan sweep exempts categories but not zodiac prose pages — unless explicitly flagged).
* Collapse duplicated content across [[Sexagenary cycle]] and [[Sexagenary cycle german style]] if the two pages really are meant to be different rather than accidentally divergent.

This is '''not a priority''' for the current language-consolidation effort and will not be completed in-session.

== C# port (aelaki-sharp) ==

* '''Bring <code>aelaki-sharp/</code> in line with canonical grammar.''' The C# morphology library is an outdated snapshot from before the unified back-to-front vowel shift, inanimate-gender behavior, Ki-syllable tables, and stative-verb prefixes were consolidated. Intended to eventually ship as a .NET library. Diff each module against <code>aelaki/*.py</code> and update module by module.

== See also ==

* [[Unresolved questions]] — documentation contradictions that need operator rulings
* [[Aelaki]] — main grammar hub
* [[Git commit log]] — repository change log mirrored into the wiki

[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]

[[Category:Project maintenance]]
