'''Verbs''' in [[Aelaki]] are built from triconsonantal roots using the same templatic morphology as nouns. They are divided into three classes based on transitivity, each with different agreement and case patterns.

== Verb classes ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Class !! Agreement !! Subject case !! Example
|-
| '''Transitive''' || prefix Ki (subject) + suffix Ki (object) || [[Agent]] || ''bha'' "see"
|-
| '''Active intransitive''' || prefix Ki (subject) only || [[Agent]] || ''bvae'' "drink"
|-
| '''[[Stative_verbs|Stative]]''' || suffix Ki (subject) only || [[Patient]] || ''zoduk'' "know"
|}

This is a '''split-intransitive''' (active-stative) alignment system: subjects of stative verbs pattern with objects of transitive verbs (both take suffix [[Ki_syllables|Ki]]), while subjects of active verbs pattern with subjects of transitive verbs (both take prefix Ki).

== Root and stem formation ==

Verbs use the same triconsonantal root system as nouns. The citation form (lemma) is the root displayed as '''√C₁-C₂-C₃'''.

Four core morphological operations apply to verb stems:

{| class="wikitable"
! Operation !! Form !! Meaning !! Example (d-p-z "shoot")
|-
| Base || C₁V₁C₂V₂C₃ || Perfective incomplete || ''Dapaz'' ("shot at once, success not implied")
|-
| Reduplication || C₁V₁C₂C₂V₂C₃ || Imperfective || ''Dapapaz'' ("shooting, ongoing")
|-
| Umlaut || C₁(front-V₁)C₂(front-V₂)C₃ || Perfective completed || ''Dæpæz'' ("shot, single hit achieved")
|-
| /f/ infix || C₁V₁fC₂V₂C₃ || Negation || ''Dapfaz'' ("did not shoot")
|}

== Tense and temporal frames ==

Aelaki distinguishes seven temporal frames:

{| class="wikitable"
! Tense !! Temporal reference
|-
| [[Past]] || Before speaker's lifetime
|-
| [[Mythic]] || Mythological / legendary time
|-
| [[Hesternal]] || Yesterday or before (within lifetime)
|-
| [[Present]] || Now
|-
| [[Hodiernal]] || Today (marked with ''go-'' or ''goki-'' prefix)
|-
| [[Crastinal]] || Tomorrow
|-
| [[Future]] || After tomorrow
|}

== Evidentiality ==

Every finite verb carries one of three core evidential suffixes, plus mood markers:

{| class="wikitable"
! Suffix !! Evidentiality !! Meaning
|-
| ''-shë'' || [[Visual]] || Speaker witnessed it directly
|-
| ''-ro'' || [[Auditory]] / testimony || Speaker heard it reported
|-
| ''-mu'' / ''-shëm'' || [[Inferential]] || Speaker deduced it
|-
| ''-ya'' || [[Optative]] || Speaker wishes it
|-
| ''-yam'' || [[Deliberative]] || Speaker wonders / asks about it
|-
| ''-rum'' || Future inferential || Speaker expects it will happen
|-
| ''-ng'' || [[Intentional]] || Speaker intends to do it (1st person)
|}

== Aspect ==

Aspect interacts with the base morphological operations:

{| class="wikitable"
! Aspect !! Formation
|-
| [[Telic]] (completed) || Umlaut (vowel fronting)
|-
| [[Atelic]] (incomplete) || Base form
|-
| [[Habitual]] || Base form (present tense)
|-
| [[Continuous]] || Reduplication
|-
| [[Gnomic]] || Umlaut (universal truth)
|}

[[Stative_verbs|Stative verbs]] have an additional set of six '''prefix aspects''': [[Inchoative]] (nü-), [[Cessative]] (nï-), [[Resumptive]] (lu-), [[Almost]] (ko-), [[Probable]] (ho-), and [[Repetitive]] (li-). These can be made '''continuative''' through prefix reduplication (e.g. ''nünü-'' = "in the process of starting").

== Verb agreement ==

Verbs agree with their arguments via [[Ki_syllables]]:

{| class="wikitable"
! !! Position !! Encodes
|-
| Subject Ki || Prefix || Person + gender + number of subject
|-
| Object Ki || Suffix || Person + gender + number of object
|}

[[Inanimate]] nouns cannot appear as agents of dynamic verbs. When agreement is needed, speakers use an animate counter.

== Hodiernal sandhi ==

When the hodiernal prefix ''go-'' is used and a TAM suffix follows, the consonant cluster ''-nk-'' is inserted between the stem and the suffix.

== See also ==

* [[Stative_verbs]] — stative verbs with prefix aspect system
* [[Converbs]] — non-finite verb forms functioning as adverbial clauses
* [[Ki_syllables]] — person-gender-number clitics for verb agreement
* [[Copula]] — irregular verb "hold" used as copula
* [[Word_order]] — SVO base with pro-drop

[[Category:parts of speech]]
[[Category:git synced pages]]
