[[Category:Aelaki grammar]]

== Historical baseline ==
Classical [[Aelaki]] texts are parsed as '''Subject-Verb-Object''' (SVO). However, modern speech is almost entirely '''pro-drop''', so the finite verb tends to surface first. The default spoken order is therefore '''V(S)(O)''', with arguments recovered from [[Ki_syllables|Ki clitics]] or context.

== Clause order by verb class ==

When overt arguments do appear, the canonical order depends on the verb class (''source: Discord conlangs-server, 2025-05-30''):

{| class="wikitable"
! Verb class !! Canonical order !! Example
|-
| '''Transitive''' || S V O || ''Tidanash bsl shabesh'' "the person tree-hit"
|-
| '''Intransitive (active)''' || S V || ''Tidanash shasaero'' "the person walked"
|-
| '''Intransitive (stative)''' || V S || ''shazodukoth tidanash'' "the person knows"
|}

The active/stative split mirrors the [[Ki_syllables|Ki clitic]] placement (prefix for actives, suffix for statives).

== Argument marking with Ki placement ==
{| class="wikitable"
! Verb type !! Prefix Ki (left of stem) !! Suffix Ki (right of stem)
|-
| '''Transitive''' || subject || object
|-
| '''Intransitive (active)''' || subject || –
|-
| '''Intransitive (stative)''' || – || subject
|}

== Imperative template ==
[[Imperative]]s historically employed '''S-O-V''' order. In modern usage they retain a frozen morphology:

: [SUBJ-Ki][OBJ-Ki]-VERB

This pattern is now the default 1st-person futurative:

: '''Thu-bal-zar''' "Let '''me''' catch '''two''' (fish)!"

The imperative's frozen SOV survives as a fossil of pre-classical [[Aelaki]] word order, which was also SOV (''source: Discord conlangs-server, 2025-05-03'').

== Weather verbs ==

Weather verbs take a dedicated agreement frame: '''masculine subject, feminine object''', conventionally analyzed as ''a part of the sky acts on a part of the ground'' (''source: Discord conlangs-server, 2025-06-05''). Unlike many natural languages, Aelaki actively conjugates weather verbs rather than treating them as impersonal. Example:

: '''Sharokasoro''' "it's raining" — 3p.MASC.SING-rain.ATEL-PAST.AUD with implicit 3p.FEM.SING object.

== Gnomic clauses and argument umlaut ==

In a [[Gnomic|gnomic]] clause, the back-to-front vowel shift propagates ''past the verb'' onto the subject and object as well, giving an entirely umlauted clause (''source: Discord conlangs-server, 2025-06-04''):

: ''Pæn Dhihevæsh Shædhïm'' "the sun shines [universal truth]"

Every content word in the clause has front-vowel realizations — ''Pæn'' not ''pan'', ''Dhihevæsh'' not ''dhihavash'', ''Shædhïm'' not ''shadhim'' — marking the whole clause as gnomic.

== Switch reference ==

Aelaki uses the topic-shift particle ''nono'' (rather than bound morphology) to redirect which referent is the running topic of a chained clause, and contrasts [[Third_person|3p]] (clause-shared referent) with [[Fourth_person|4p]] (newly-introduced referent) to track arguments across clauses. See [[Switch references]] for details.

== Flexibility ==

Word order is otherwise relatively fluid; rigid orders typically appear only when many same-gender referents would otherwise create ambiguity (''source: Discord conlangs-server, 2025-05-31''). Speakers may fall back to strict archaic order to disambiguate in those cases.

== Pragmatic notes ==
* First-person speakers strongly prefer the [[Visual|visual past]] for narration of completed actions
* Except in humorous or self-deprecating references, one avoids assigning oneself the [[Mythic|mythical past]]

== Case hierarchy ==
When a verb agrees with multiple arguments, a hierarchy determines which gets the Ki slot:

'''[[Agent]]''' > '''[[Dative]]''' > '''[[Patient]]''' > '''[[Instrumental]]''' > '''[[Possessive]]''' > '''[[Speaker]]'''

The [[Speaker]] case should be indicated with the speaker auxiliary verb if it is overwritten by a higher-ranked case.

== See also ==
* [[Ki_syllables]]
* [[Imperative]]
* [[Switch references]]
* [[Agent]]
* [[Patient]]
* [[Random_sentences]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]
