<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[af:Houtrot (astrologie)]][[cdo:Gák-cṳ̄]][[de:Holz-Ratte]][[en:Wood Rat]][[fr:Rat de bois]][[hak:Kap-chṳ́]][[id:Jiazi]][[it:Jiazi]][[ja:甲子]][[ko:갑자]][[nds:Holt-Rött]][[vi:Giáp Tý]][[za:Gyapceij]][[zh-min-nan:Kap-chú]][[zh-yue:甲子]][[zh:甲子]]

'''Yang Wood Rat also known as Wood Rat''' (甲子) is the first combination of the [[Sexagenary cycle]] of the [[Chinese zodiac]].

==Pronunciation==
* English: Yang Wood Rat (甲子)
** Chinese (Mandarin Pinyin): jiǎzǐ
** Cantonese (Jyutping): gaap3 zi2
** Japanese:
***Kunyomi 1: Kinoe-ne
***Onyomi 1: Koushi
***Onyomi 2: Kasshi
** Korean (Revised Romanization, Hangul): gapja (갑자)
** Vietnamese (Hán-Việt): Giáp Tý

==Years of Yang Wood Rat==
A year of the Wood Rat occurs every 60 years, in a year that ends in 4, according to the following table:
{| class="wikitable"
|+Associated years
!1st millennium
!2nd millennium
!3rd millennium
!4th millennium
|- style="vertical-align:top;"
|
* 4
* 64
* 124
* 184
* 244
* 304
* 364
* 424
* 484
* 544
* 604
* 664
* 724
* 784
* 844
* 904
* 964
|
* 1024
* 1084
* 1144
* 1204
* 1264
* 1324
* 1384
* 1444
* 1504
* 1564
* 1624
* 1684
* 1744
* 1804
* 1864
* 1924
* 1984
|
* 2044
* 2104
* 2164
* 2224
* 2284
* 2344
* 2404
* 2464
* 2524
* 2584
* 2644
* 2704
* 2764
* 2824
* 2884
* 2944
|
* 3004
* 3064
* 3124
* 3184
* 3244
* 3304
* 3364
|}

==Months of Yang Wood Rat==
It was four years after the year of the [[:en:Metal Rooster|Metal Rooster]], the year of the [[Revolution]] of the [[Dynasty]] changeover, and was considered the year of the ''revolutionary decree'', or the year of many upheavals, when the [[Tian]] will is renewed and heavenly commands are given to those who possess virtue ('''Kōji kaihatsu''''). In order to prevent this, the new year has often been held in this year since the Heian period in Japan. Since the Koshi Reform of 1024, the only year prior to the Meiji era (when the reign of the first emperor was abolished with the decree of Issei Ichigen) in which there was no Koshi Reform was in [[Eiroku]] 7 (1564).

Emperor [[:en:Kanmu|Emperor Kanmu]] was also the son of [[Emperor Tenji|Tenchi]], who ascended to the throne after the [[Emperor Tenmu|Tenmu]] lineage was severed by the murder of his half-brother [[Emperor Kōbun|Otomo]], a prince of the Tenchi line. [[Emperor Kōnin]], and it is said that he moved the capital to [[Nagaoka-kyō|Nagaoka-kyo]] in 784, the year of the Revolution, because he was strongly aware of the change of royal line.

The [[Yellow Turban Rebellion]], which occurred in 184, the last days of the Later Han Dynasty in China and determined the dissolution of the Han Dynasty, was described as "the {{Lang|zh-hant|蒼天已死 黄天當立 歳在甲子 天下大吉|qq=}}" ("Book of the Later Han|The Later Han Dynasty"). Volume 71: Huangfu Song, Zhu Shiyi, Biography 61 [[Huangfu Song|Huang Fu Bulk]] biography)". The slogan was.

A hot spring discovered in [[Mutsu Province|Mutsu]] (now Fukushima Prefecture) in [[Nanboku-chō period]] in 1384 was named Koshi Onsen (甲子温泉) in honor of the year Koshi.

Ito Daizo (大藏) changed his name to Ito Koshi-taro (Kashitaro/Kinetaro) in honor of the first year of [[:en:Genji (era)|Genji]] (1864), the year of the Koshi.

The baseball stadium built in [[Taishō era|Taisho]] 13 (1924) in [[Hyōgo Prefecture]] [[Nishinomiya|Nishinomiya City]] was named "Koshien Grand Sports Ground" (now [[Koshien Stadium|Hanshin Koshien Stadium]]) after the Chinese zodiac of that year.
 It is also the name of a place in the city. This year also marks the origin of the name of the Tokyo Kosha Company.

==Days of Yang Wood Rat==

* [[:en:Hwangap|Hwangap]]
*[[Sixtieth birthday in the Sinosphere]]
*[[Kasshi]]
*[[Kinoene Soy Sauce]]
== References == 
{{Referencesヘルプ|qq=}}
<references />

{{wikidata link|Q1190890}}
[[Category:Pages with unreviewed translations]]
[[Category:Sexagenary cycle]]
[[Category:Sexagenary cycle members]]
[[Category:Git synced pages]]
