[[Category:grammatical numbers]]
The '''zero''' is a grammatical number in [[Aelaki]] used to express negation, the absence of something, or to form questions when combined with the question particle.

== Formation ==

The zero number is formed by inserting the '''infix /f/''' between the first vowel and the second consonant, transforming the base [[Singular|singular]] template C₁V₁C₂V₂C₃ into C₁V₁fC₂V₂C₃. This /f/ infix is one of the four core morphological operations in Aelaki.

{| class="wikitable"
! Root !! Singular !! Zero !! Gloss
|-
| B-S-L || Basol || Bafasol || tree / no tree
|-
| SH-B-V || Shabav || Shafbav || man / no man
|}

== Uses ==

=== Negation ===

The zero number expresses the absence or nonexistence of the noun. It functions as grammatical negation at the noun level.

: '''Shafbavadashro Roger Rabbit''' -- "No man killed Roger Rabbit"

=== Questions ===

When the zero number is combined with the question particle '''Shu''', it forms a question. The zero-marked noun becomes an interrogative.

: '''Shafbavadashro Roger Rabbit Shu''' -- "Who killed Roger Rabbit?"

In this construction, the zero number marks the unknown referent, and the question particle Shu signals that the sentence is a question rather than a negation.

== Relationship to Other Numbers ==

The zero number represents the negation operation among the four core morphological strategies of Aelaki:

{| class="wikitable"
! Number !! Operation !! Template !! Function
|-
| [[Singular]] || Base (unmarked) || C₁V₁C₂V₂C₃ || One instance
|-
| [[Aelaki plural|Plural]] || Reduplication of C₂ || C₁V₁C₂C₂V₂C₃ || Some of (partitive)
|-
| [[Collective]] || Umlaut (vowel fronting) || C₁frontV₁C₂frontV₂C₃ || All of (totality)
|-
| '''Zero''' || Infix /f/ || C₁V₁fC₂V₂C₃ || None / negation
|}

== Ki Syllables ==

The [[Ki]] syllables encode the zero as one of the four number distinctions (singular/plural/collective/zero) for each person-gender combination. The zero Ki syllable is used in verbal agreement when the subject noun carries zero number marking.

== See Also ==

* [[Singular]]
* [[Aelaki plural|Plural]]
* [[Paucal]]
* [[Plentiful]]
* [[Collective]]

[[Category:git synced pages]]
